README.md, before:

![logo](/skillet-logo.png)

# Skillet — “Lightning-fast formulas, Rust-powered.”

[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/skillet.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/skillet)
[![Docs.rs](https://docs.rs/skillet/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/skillet)

Skillet is a tiny, embeddable expression engine (written in Rust) inspired by Excel formulas and Ruby-style chaining. It parses expressions into an AST and evaluates them with a small runtime.

This MVP supports numbers, strings, booleans, nulls, arrays, method chaining, functions (built-ins), comparisons, logical ops, ternary, array indexing/slicing, spread `...`, lambdas with named parameters, and basic type casting via `::Type`.

Skilled can be extended with JS, take a look at [Documentation](DOCUMENTATION.md)

## Build

- Requirements: Rust stable (2021 edition)
- Build and test:

```
cargo build
cargo test
```

## CLI (quick try)

A minimal CLI is included to evaluate expressions without external variables.

```
cargo run --bin sk -- "= [30,60,80,100].filter(:x > 50).map(:x * 0.9).sum()"
```

Notes:
- Wrap the expression in quotes in your shell.
- A leading `=` is optional (supported for spreadsheet-style familiarity).

## Library Usage

Add to your Cargo project (from crates.io):

```toml
[dependencies]
skillet = "0.2.0"
```

Or with cargo-edit:

```
cargo add skillet@0.2.0
```

Evaluate expressions:

```rust
use skillet::{evaluate, evaluate_with, Value};
use std::collections::HashMap;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Numeric
    let v = evaluate("= 2 + 3 * 4")?; // -> Value::Number(14.0)

    // Variables
    let mut vars = HashMap::new();
    vars.insert("sales".to_string(), Value::Number(5000.0));
    let v = evaluate_with("=SUM(:sales, 1000)", &vars)?; // -> 6000.0

    // Strings and chaining
    let v = evaluate("= '  john  '.trim().upper()")?; // -> "JOHN"

    // Arrays + F/M/R
    let v = evaluate("= [30,60,80,100].filter(:x > 50).map(:x * 0.9).sum()")?; // -> 216.0

    // Named lambda parameters
    let v = evaluate("= FILTER([1,2,3,4], :n % 2 == 0, 'n')")?; // -> [2,4]

    // Type casting
    let v = evaluate("= '42'::Integer")?; // -> 42
    Ok(())
}
```

## Language Features (MVP)

- Numbers, booleans (`TRUE`/`FALSE`), strings ('...' or "..."), `NULL`
- Operators: `+ - * / % ^`, `> < >= <= == !=`, `AND/OR/NOT` (also `&&/||/!`), ternary `? :`
- Variables: `:name` (provided via `evaluate_with` map)
- Functions (subset):
  - Math: `SUM`, `AVG/AVERAGE`, `MIN`, `MAX`, `ROUND`, `CEIL`, `FLOOR`, `ABS`, `SQRT`, `POW`
  - Arrays: `ARRAY`, `FIRST`, `LAST`, `CONTAINS`, `UNIQUE`, `SORT`, `REVERSE`, `JOIN`, `FLATTEN`
  - Strings: `CONCAT`, `UPPER`, `LOWER`, `TRIM`, `LENGTH`, `SPLIT`, `REPLACE`
  - Logic: `ISBLANK`
  - Functional: `FILTER(array, expr, [param])`, `MAP(array, expr, [param])`, `REDUCE(array, expr, initial, [valParam], [accParam])`
  - Conditional aggregations: `SUMIF(array, expr)`, `AVGIF(array, expr)`, `COUNTIF(array, expr)`
- Methods (subset): chaining with `.` and predicates `?`
  - Numbers: `.abs() .round(n) .floor() .ceil()`; predicates `.positive? .negative? .zero? .even? .odd? .numeric?`
  - Arrays: `.length() .size() .first() .last() .sum() .avg() .min() .max() .sort() .unique() .reverse() .compact() .flatten()`
  - Strings: `.upper() .lower() .trim() .reverse()`
- Arrays: literals `[1, 2, 3]`; indexing `arr[i]` (negatives allowed); slicing `arr[a:b]`
- Spread: `...expr` inside arg lists
- Casting: `expr::Integer|Float|String|Boolean|Array|Currency|DateTime|Json`

## Examples

- Arithmetic precedence: `= 2 + 3 * 4` → `14`
- Ternary: `= :score >= 90 ? 'A' : 'B'`
- Named lambda param: `= [1,2,3,4].map(:v * 10, 'v')` → `[10,20,30,40]`
- Reduce with named params: `= [1,2,3].reduce(:a + :v, 0, 'v', 'a')` → `6`
- SUMIF: `= SUMIF([1,-2,3,-4], :x > 0)` → `4`
- FLATTEN: `= FLATTEN([1,[2,[3]],4])` → `[1,2,3,4]`

## Notes

- This is an MVP; error messages and type coverage are intentionally minimal.
- For variables beyond numbers/strings/arrays (e.g., dates, currency), see `Value` in `src/types.rs`.

## Install Binaries

If you want the binaries such as `sk`, `sk_server` and `sk_client` installed system-wide:

```
cargo install skillet
```

## Server Mode

Skillet includes a high-performance evaluation server that keeps the interpreter warm and eliminates per-process overhead.

- Start the server: `sk_server 8080` (binds to 127.0.0.1:8080)
- Daemonize (Unix): `sk_server 8080 -d` (writes PID to `skillet-server.pid` in CWD)
- Stop daemon: `kill $(cat skillet-server.pid)`

Client and benchmarks:
- One-off eval: `sk_client localhost:8080 '=2+3*4'`
- With variables: `sk_client localhost:8080 '=SUM(:a,:b)' a=10 b=5`
- JSON vars: `sk_client localhost:8080 '=:user.name' --json '{"user":{"name":"Alice"}}'`
- Benchmark: `sk_client localhost:8080 --benchmark '=2+3*4' 10000`

Scripts:
- Build + run multi-test benchmark: `bash scripts/benchmark_server.sh [port] [iterations] [threads]`

> take a look at the [Server Usage Guide](SERVER_USAGE_GUIDE.md) for more details about how to use it and consume in different langauages

## Built-in Functions

- Arithmetic: `SUM`, `AVG`/`AVERAGE`, `MIN`, `MAX`, `ROUND`, `CEIL`, `CEILING`, `FLOOR`, `ABS`, `SQRT`, `POW`/`POWER`, `MOD`, `INT`
- Logical: `AND`, `OR`, `NOT`, `XOR`, `IF`, `IFS`
- String: `LENGTH`, `CONCAT`, `UPPER`, `LOWER`, `TRIM`, `SUBSTRING`, `SPLIT`, `REPLACE`, `REVERSE`, `ISBLANK`, `ISNUMBER`, `ISTEXT`
- Array: `ARRAY`, `FLATTEN`, `FIRST`, `LAST`, `CONTAINS`, `IN`, `COUNT`, `UNIQUE`, `SORT`, `REVERSE`, `JOIN`
- Date/Time: `NOW`, `DATE`, `TIME`, `YEAR`, `MONTH`, `DAY`, `DATEADD`, `DATEDIFF`
- Financial: `PMT`, `DB`, `FV`, `IPMT`
- Statistical: `MEDIAN`, `MODE.SNGL` (`MODESNGL`, `MODE_SNGL`), `STDEV.P` (`STDEVP`, `STDEV_P`), `VAR.P` (`VARP`, `VAR_P`), `PERCENTILE.INC` (`PERCENTILEINC`, `PERCENTILE_INC`), `QUARTILE.INC` (`QUARTILEINC`, `QUARTILE_INC`)
- Functional: `FILTER(array, expr, [param])`, `MAP(array, expr, [param])`, `REDUCE(array, expr, initial, [valParam], [accParam])`, `SUMIF(array, expr)`, `AVGIF(array, expr)`, `COUNTIF(array, expr)`

## API Surface (Rust)

- `parse(input: &str) -> Result<Expr, Error>`: parse into AST
- `evaluate(input: &str) -> Result<Value, Error>`: evaluate without variables
- `evaluate_with(input: &str, vars: &HashMap<String, Value>) -> Result<Value, Error>`
- `evaluate_with_json(input: &str, json_vars: &str) -> Result<Value, Error>`
- `evaluate_with_custom(input: &str, vars: &HashMap<String, Value>) -> Result<Value, Error>`
- `evaluate_with_json_custom(input: &str, json_vars: &str) -> Result<Value, Error>`
- Custom functions:
  - `register_function(Box<dyn CustomFunction>) -> Result<(), Error>`
  - `unregister_function(name: &str) -> bool`
  - `list_custom_functions() -> Vec<String>`
- Types:
  - `Value` enum: `Number(f64) | Array(Vec<Value>) | Boolean(bool) | String(String) | Null | Currency(f64) | DateTime(i64) | Json(String)`
  - `Error` with `message` and optional `position`


## Tests

Run the test suite:

```
cargo test
```

## Author

[@zenbakiak](/zenbakiak)

[Github repo](https://github.com/zenbakiak/skillet)

## License

MIT OR Apache-2.0

Commit message:

Develop (#14)
- Allow server to bind address in order to expose server
- Fixes client parameter parsing
- Adds to_i(), to_s(), to_boolean() methods
- Fixes json parameter parsing and adds sanitization for keys with special characters.
- Adds include_variables option to add variable results in response.
- Fixes datetime functions.
- Fixes DOCUMENTATION.md examples.
- Fixing client parameter parsing
- Adds to_i, to_boolean, to_s methods, adds json sanitization keys
- Adds skillet http server
- allow http server to be daemonized
- Fixes json parsing
- Fixes datetime functions, removes pid file
- Adds the incude variables param to receive all values in the response, renamed variables to arguments in the request body
- Accepts assignation of variables with objects, fixes json object bugs, cleans repo
- Adds .find() FIND(), BETWEEN(), .between()
- Adds http js functions management, adds admin token
- Adds left, mid, right string functions

README.md, after:

![logo](/skillet-logo.png)

# Skillet — “Lightning-fast formulas, Rust-powered.”

[![Crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/skillet.svg)](https://crates.io/crates/skillet)
[![Docs.rs](https://docs.rs/skillet/badge.svg)](https://docs.rs/skillet)

Skillet is a tiny, embeddable expression engine (written in Rust) inspired by Excel formulas and Ruby-style chaining. It parses expressions into an AST and evaluates them with a small runtime.

This MVP supports numbers, strings, booleans, nulls, arrays, method chaining, functions (built-ins), comparisons, logical ops, ternary, array indexing/slicing, spread `...`, lambdas with named parameters, and basic type casting via `::Type`.

Skilled can be extended with JS, take a look at [Documentation](DOCUMENTATION.md)

## Build

- Requirements: Rust stable (2021 edition)
- Build and test:

```
cargo build
cargo test
```

## CLI (quick try)

A minimal CLI is included to evaluate expressions without external variables.

```
cargo run --bin sk -- "= [30,60,80,100].filter(:x > 50).map(:x * 0.9).sum()"
```

Notes:
- Wrap the expression in quotes in your shell.
- A leading `=` is optional (supported for spreadsheet-style familiarity).

## Library Usage

Add to your Cargo project (from crates.io):

```toml
[dependencies]
skillet = "0.2.0"
```

Or with cargo-edit:

```
cargo add skillet@0.2.0
```

Evaluate expressions:

```rust
use skillet::{evaluate, evaluate_with, Value};
use std::collections::HashMap;

fn main() -> Result<(), Box<dyn std::error::Error>> {
    // Numeric
    let v = evaluate("= 2 + 3 * 4")?; // -> Value::Number(14.0)

    // Variables
    let mut vars = HashMap::new();
    vars.insert("sales".to_string(), Value::Number(5000.0));
    let v = evaluate_with("=SUM(:sales, 1000)", &vars)?; // -> 6000.0

    // Strings and chaining
    let v = evaluate("= '  john  '.trim().upper()")?; // -> "JOHN"

    // Arrays + F/M/R
    let v = evaluate("= [30,60,80,100].filter(:x > 50).map(:x * 0.9).sum()")?; // -> 216.0

    // Named lambda parameters
    let v = evaluate("= FILTER([1,2,3,4], :n % 2 == 0, 'n')")?; // -> [2,4]

    // Type casting
    let v = evaluate("= '42'::Integer")?; // -> 42
    Ok(())
}
```

## Language Features (MVP)

- Numbers, booleans (`TRUE`/`FALSE`), strings ('...' or "..."), `NULL`
- Operators: `+ - * / % ^`, `> < >= <= == !=`, `AND/OR/NOT` (also `&&/||/!`), ternary `? :`
- Variables: `:name` (provided via `evaluate_with` map)
- Functions (subset):
  - Math: `SUM`, `AVG/AVERAGE`, `MIN`, `MAX`, `ROUND`, `CEIL`, `FLOOR`, `ABS`, `SQRT`, `POW`
  - Arrays: `ARRAY`, `FIRST`, `LAST`, `CONTAINS`, `UNIQUE`, `SORT`, `REVERSE`, `JOIN`, `FLATTEN`
  - Strings: `CONCAT`, `UPPER`, `LOWER`, `TRIM`, `LENGTH`, `SPLIT`, `REPLACE`
  - Logic: `ISBLANK`
  - Functional: `FILTER(array, expr, [param])`, `MAP(array, expr, [param])`, `REDUCE(array, expr, initial, [valParam], [accParam])`
  - Conditional aggregations: `SUMIF(array, expr)`, `AVGIF(array, expr)`, `COUNTIF(array, expr)`
- Methods (subset): chaining with `.` and predicates `?`
  - Numbers: `.abs() .round(n) .floor() .ceil()`; predicates `.positive? .negative? .zero? .even? .odd? .numeric?`
  - Arrays: `.length() .size() .first() .last() .sum() .avg() .min() .max() .sort() .unique() .reverse() .compact() .flatten()`
  - Strings: `.upper() .lower() .trim() .reverse()`
- Arrays: literals `[1, 2, 3]`; indexing `arr[i]` (negatives allowed); slicing `arr[a:b]`
- Spread: `...expr` inside arg lists
- Casting: `expr::Integer|Float|String|Boolean|Array|Currency|DateTime|Json`

## Examples

- Arithmetic precedence: `= 2 + 3 * 4` → `14`
- Ternary: `= :score >= 90 ? 'A' : 'B'`
- Named lambda param: `= [1,2,3,4].map(:v * 10, 'v')` → `[10,20,30,40]`
- Reduce with named params: `= [1,2,3].reduce(:a + :v, 0, 'v', 'a')` → `6`
- SUMIF: `= SUMIF([1,-2,3,-4], :x > 0)` → `4`
- FLATTEN: `= FLATTEN([1,[2,[3]],4])` → `[1,2,3,4]`

## Notes

- This is an MVP; error messages and type coverage are intentionally minimal.
- For variables beyond numbers/strings/arrays (e.g., dates, currency), see `Value` in `src/types.rs`.

## Install Binaries

If you want the binaries such as `sk`, `sk_server` and `sk_client` installed system-wide:

```
cargo install skillet
```

## Server Mode

Skillet includes a high-performance evaluation server that keeps the interpreter warm and eliminates per-process overhead.

- Start the server: `sk_server 8080` (binds to 127.0.0.1:8080)
- Daemonize (Unix): `sk_server 8080 -d` (writes PID to `skillet-server.pid` in CWD)
- Stop daemon: `kill $(cat skillet-server.pid)`
- Bind host/IP: `sk_server 8080 --host 0.0.0.0` (listen on all interfaces)
- Optional token auth: `sk_server 8080 --host 0.0.0.0 --token <secret>` (or set `SKILLET_AUTH_TOKEN`)

Client and benchmarks:
- One-off eval: `sk_client localhost:8080 '=2+3*4'`
- With variables: `sk_client localhost:8080 '=SUM(:a,:b)' a=10 b=5`
- JSON vars: `sk_client localhost:8080 '=:user.name' --json '{"user":{"name":"Alice"}}'`
- Benchmark: `sk_client localhost:8080 --benchmark '=2+3*4' 10000`
- With token: `sk_client localhost:8080 '=2+3*4' --token <secret>` (or set `SKILLET_SERVER_TOKEN`)

Scripts:
- Build + run multi-test benchmark: `bash scripts/benchmark_server.sh [port] [iterations] [threads]`

> take a look at the [Server Usage Guide](SERVER_USAGE_GUIDE.md) for more details about how to use it and consume in different langauages

## Built-in Functions

- Arithmetic: `SUM`, `AVG`/`AVERAGE`, `MIN`, `MAX`, `ROUND`, `CEIL`, `CEILING`, `FLOOR`, `ABS`, `SQRT`, `POW`/`POWER`, `MOD`, `INT`
- Logical: `AND`, `OR`, `NOT`, `XOR`, `IF`, `IFS`
- String: `LENGTH`, `CONCAT`, `UPPER`, `LOWER`, `TRIM`, `SUBSTRING`, `SPLIT`, `REPLACE`, `REVERSE`, `ISBLANK`, `ISNUMBER`, `ISTEXT`
- Array: `ARRAY`, `FLATTEN`, `FIRST`, `LAST`, `CONTAINS`, `IN`, `COUNT`, `UNIQUE`, `SORT`, `REVERSE`, `JOIN`
- Date/Time: `NOW`, `DATE`, `TIME`, `YEAR`, `MONTH`, `DAY`, `DATEADD`, `DATEDIFF`
- Financial: `PMT`, `DB`, `FV`, `IPMT`
- Statistical: `MEDIAN`, `MODE.SNGL` (`MODESNGL`, `MODE_SNGL`), `STDEV.P` (`STDEVP`, `STDEV_P`), `VAR.P` (`VARP`, `VAR_P`), `PERCENTILE.INC` (`PERCENTILEINC`, `PERCENTILE_INC`), `QUARTILE.INC` (`QUARTILEINC`, `QUARTILE_INC`)
- Functional: `FILTER(array, expr, [param])`, `MAP(array, expr, [param])`, `REDUCE(array, expr, initial, [valParam], [accParam])`, `SUMIF(array, expr)`, `AVGIF(array, expr)`, `COUNTIF(array, expr)`

## API Surface (Rust)

- `parse(input: &str) -> Result<Expr, Error>`: parse into AST
- `evaluate(input: &str) -> Result<Value, Error>`: evaluate without variables
- `evaluate_with(input: &str, vars: &HashMap<String, Value>) -> Result<Value, Error>`
- `evaluate_with_json(input: &str, json_vars: &str) -> Result<Value, Error>`
- `evaluate_with_custom(input: &str, vars: &HashMap<String, Value>) -> Result<Value, Error>`
- `evaluate_with_json_custom(input: &str, json_vars: &str) -> Result<Value, Error>`
- Custom functions:
  - `register_function(Box<dyn CustomFunction>) -> Result<(), Error>`
  - `unregister_function(name: &str) -> bool`
  - `list_custom_functions() -> Vec<String>`
- Types:
  - `Value` enum: `Number(f64) | Array(Vec<Value>) | Boolean(bool) | String(String) | Null | Currency(f64) | DateTime(i64) | Json(String)`
  - `Error` with `message` and optional `position`


## Tests

Run the test suite:

```
cargo test
```

## Author

[@zenbakiak](/zenbakiak)

[Github repo](https://github.com/zenbakiak/skillet)

## License

MIT OR Apache-2.0
